MR MAN'S DOWNLOADER - HOW TO USE IT
====================================

Hey, thanks for grabbing this. I tried to keep it simple, but there are a few
moving parts, so I wrote everything down in one place. If you only read one
section, read "THE QUICK VERSION" right below.


THE QUICK VERSION
-----------------
1. Install Python (python.org) and tick "Add python.exe to PATH" during setup.
2. Open a terminal and run:  pip install yt-dlp mutagen gallery-dl
3. Install ffmpeg (see section 2 below, it's the one people forget).
4. Double-click mr_mans_downloader.py (or run it from a terminal).
5. Paste a link, hit Download.

That's it. The rest of this file is the longer explanation plus fixes for the
things that tend to go wrong.


WHAT THIS PROGRAM ACTUALLY IS
-----------------------------
It's a friendly window wrapped around a few free, open-source tools:

  - yt-dlp       does the downloading for YouTube, SoundCloud and a ton of
                 other sites
  - ffmpeg       converts things (turns video into MP3, merges video+audio,
                 etc.). yt-dlp can't make MP3s without it.
  - gallery-dl   used for Instagram and TikTok posts, since it's better at
                 grabbing photo carousels
  - mutagen      a small Python library that lets the Tag Editor tab edit
                 song info (title, artist, album...)

The app can download most of these for you the first time you open it, but
sometimes that doesn't work (no internet, antivirus got nervous, whatever), so
below are all the manual ways to install everything.


SECTION 1: INSTALLING PYTHON
----------------------------
You need Python 3.9 or newer.

Option A (the normal way)
  1. Go to https://www.python.org/downloads/
  2. Download the latest installer for Windows.
  3. Run it. On the very first screen, check the box that says
     "Add python.exe to PATH". This is the single most common thing people
     miss, and it's why "pip is not recognized" errors happen later.
  4. Click Install Now.

Option B (no clicking through installers)
  Open Command Prompt or PowerShell and run:
      winget install Python.Python.3.12

To check it worked, open a NEW terminal window (an old one won't see the
change) and type:
      python --version
You should see something like "Python 3.12.x".

If "python" doesn't work but "py" does, that's fine, just use "py" in place of
"python" everywhere in this guide.


SECTION 2: INSTALLING THE TOOLS
-------------------------------
Quick note first: when you open the app on Windows, it checks whether yt-dlp,
ffmpeg and gallery-dl are installed. If something is missing it asks if you
want it installed, and if you say yes it downloads the files into a folder
called "tools" right next to the program. That's the easiest route. If that
works for you, you can skip the rest of this section.

If you'd rather do it by hand (or the automatic install failed), here are the
options. Pick whichever you're comfortable with.

--- The pip way (needs Python) ---

Open a terminal and run these:

    pip install yt-dlp
    pip install mutagen
    pip install gallery-dl

Or all at once:

    pip install yt-dlp mutagen gallery-dl

If you get "pip is not recognized", try one of these instead:

    python -m pip install yt-dlp mutagen gallery-dl
    py -m pip install yt-dlp mutagen gallery-dl

If you get a permissions error, add --user:

    python -m pip install --user yt-dlp mutagen gallery-dl

To update later (yt-dlp changes constantly because sites keep changing things
under it, so this is worth doing every month or two, or any time downloads
suddenly stop working):

    python -m pip install -U yt-dlp gallery-dl

Heads up: pip does NOT install ffmpeg. That one has to be done separately,
see below.

--- The non-pip way: winget (built into Windows 10/11) ---

    winget install yt-dlp.yt-dlp
    winget install Gyan.FFmpeg

Close and reopen your terminal afterwards so the new programs are found.
(gallery-dl isn't something I'd count on winget for, use pip or the manual
download below for that one.)

--- The non-pip way: Scoop ---

If you already use Scoop (https://scoop.sh):

    scoop install yt-dlp ffmpeg gallery-dl

--- The non-pip way: Chocolatey ---

If you already use Chocolatey, in an Administrator terminal:

    choco install yt-dlp ffmpeg

--- The manual way (no package managers at all) ---

This works everywhere and is basically what the app does for you automatically.

  yt-dlp:
    Download yt-dlp.exe from https://github.com/yt-dlp/yt-dlp/releases/latest

  gallery-dl:
    Download gallery-dl.exe from
    https://github.com/mikf/gallery-dl/releases/latest

  ffmpeg:
    Get a Windows build from https://ffmpeg.org/download.html (the links
    there point to builds from gyan.dev or BtbN). Download the zip, open it,
    go into the "bin" folder, and copy out ffmpeg.exe and ffprobe.exe.

Then put all of those .exe files in ONE of these places:

  a) The "tools" folder next to mr_mans_downloader.py (the app creates it
     the first time it runs, or you can make it yourself). This is the
     easiest, the app looks there automatically.
  b) Any folder that's on your Windows PATH.

If you put things somewhere unusual, you can also point the app at them from
the "Tool Launcher" tab using the "Set Path..." button.

--- Checking that everything is installed ---

Open a fresh terminal and run:

    yt-dlp --version
    ffmpeg -version
    ffprobe -version
    gallery-dl --version

Each one should print a version number instead of an error. (If you used the
"tools" folder method, the terminal won't find them, that's normal. The app
will, because it adds that folder to its own search path.)


SECTION 3: STARTING THE APP
---------------------------
Easiest: double-click mr_mans_downloader.py.

If a window flashes and disappears, or nothing happens, open a terminal in the
folder and run it from there so you can see any error message:

    cd path\to\the\folder
    python mr_mans_downloader.py

(Tip: in File Explorer, click the address bar, type "cmd", and press Enter.
It opens a terminal already sitting in that folder.)

When the app opens you'll see small messages along the bottom of the window,
like "Checking for required tools..." and "Scanning for yt-dlp updates...".
Nothing is wrong, it's just checking whether you have the latest version of
yt-dlp. If a newer one exists it'll ask if you want to update. Saying yes is
almost always a good idea, because old versions are the number one reason a
download that used to work suddenly stops working.


SECTION 4: DOWNLOADING STUFF (THE DOWNLOADER TAB)
-------------------------------------------------
The basic flow is: paste link, pick options, choose a folder, press Download.

1. Paste the link into the big box at the top.

2. Format dropdown
   Controls video quality and file type for normal video links.
     - "Best video+audio (mp4)" is the safe default, plays on nearly
       everything.
     - "Best video+audio (mkv)" same quality, different container.
     - "Best available" lets yt-dlp choose whatever it likes.
     - 1080p / 720p / 480p max are for when you want smaller files.

3. Checkboxes
     - Audio only (MP3): skips the video and gives you an MP3. Needs ffmpeg.
     - Download subtitles: grabs English subtitles and bakes them in.
     - Download full playlist: if the link is a video inside a playlist,
       this decides whether you get just that one video or the entire list.

4. Save to
   The folder your files end up in. Press Browse... to change it. You can set
   a permanent default in Settings.

5. Press Download
   The log at the bottom shows what's happening, and the bar above it shows
   progress. Cancel stops it.

What happens with each kind of link:

  YouTube video       Downloads as a normal video using your format choice.

  YouTube playlist    Only downloads the whole thing if "Download full
                      playlist" is ticked.

  YouTube channel     In "auto" mode the app peeks at the channel to see if
                      it looks like a music/artist channel (for example the
                      auto-generated "- Topic" channels). If it does, it
                      grabs every upload as MP3 and numbers them. If it
                      doesn't, it treats it like normal videos. You can
                      force this either way in Settings.

  SoundCloud track    Downloads as MP3 with the artist, title and cover art
                      embedded.

  SoundCloud profile  Lists every track, then downloads them one at a time
                      with a short pause between each. If one fails it
                      moves on to the next. It keeps a little archive file
                      so if you run the same profile link again later, it
                      skips everything you already have. Very handy if
                      something gets interrupted.

  Instagram / TikTok  Handled by gallery-dl. Grabs every photo and video in
                      a post or carousel. Files go into a folder named after
                      the account.

Find Oldest Track
   Paste a SoundCloud page link and press this to find out which track on
   that page was uploaded first. It checks every track's date, so on a big
   profile it can take a while.


SECTION 5: COOKIES (ONLY IF YOU NEED THEM)
------------------------------------------
Some content needs you to be logged in: private or follower-only SoundCloud
tracks, age-restricted YouTube videos, some Instagram posts. Under Options
there's a dropdown for each site where you can pick your browser. The app then
borrows your browser's login so the site thinks it's you.

  - Leave it on "None" unless you actually run into a problem.
  - Be logged in to that site in the browser you pick.
  - Closing the browser first often helps, since some browsers lock their
    cookie files while they're open.
  - If your browser has multiple profiles, type the profile name into the
    "Browser profile (optional)" box.
  - Firefox tends to be the most reliable. Chrome, Edge and Brave have
    changed how they protect cookies a few times, and it can break this
    feature for a while until yt-dlp catches up. If that happens, try
    Firefox or update yt-dlp.

For big SoundCloud profiles, using cookies is honestly the best thing you can
do, because logged-in requests are far less likely to get blocked.


SECTION 6: THE OTHER TABS
-------------------------
Tag Editor
  Pick a folder of music, click a song, and edit the title, artist, album,
  album artist, track number, year and genre. Press Save Tags. Needs mutagen
  (pip install mutagen). If you need something heavier for auto-tagging, the
  Tool Launcher has MusicBrainz Picard.

Converter
  Add files, choose Audio or Video, pick an output format, and press Convert.
  For audio you can set a bitrate (320 is the highest common quality for MP3).
  For video you can shrink the resolution and set a quality number called CRF,
  where LOWER means BETTER quality and bigger files (23 is a good default).
  Converted files go to the output folder you choose, your originals are not
  touched. Needs ffmpeg.

Duplicate Finder
  Choose a folder and press Scan. It compares the actual contents of files, not
  just names, so it catches real duplicates even if they're named differently.
  Be careful with the "Delete Extra Copies" button: it permanently deletes
  everything after the first file in each group, and it does NOT go to the
  recycle bin. Look at the list before you press it.

Tool Launcher
  A shortcut page for useful programs (Mp3tag, Picard, beets, ffmpeg, Spek,
  Audacity, gallery-dl). It shows whether each one was found, lets you launch
  it, point the app to it manually ("Set Path..."), or open its download page
  ("Get It").


SECTION 7: SETTINGS
-------------------
Click the Settings button at the top right.

  - Theme and Font: lots of choices, and they preview live as you pick.
  - Language: English, Spanish, French or German.
  - YouTube music-channel handling: auto / always / never (see above).
  - Auto-clear log: wipes the log after this many lines so the app doesn't
    get sluggish.
  - Default save folder: where downloads go by default.
  - Concurrent fragments: how many pieces of a file are downloaded at once.
    Higher is faster but can get you rate-limited. 4 is a sensible middle.
  - Retries: how many times to retry before giving up on a file.

Your settings are saved in a file called ytdlp_gui_settings.json next to the
program. Delete that file if you ever want to start fresh.


TROUBLESHOOTING
---------------
"yt-dlp not found"
   It isn't installed, or isn't where the app can see it. Restart the app and
   accept the install prompt, or install it using Section 2.

MP3 or merging doesn't work / errors mentioning ffmpeg or ffprobe
   ffmpeg is missing. This is the most common problem, since pip doesn't
   install it. Use winget install Gyan.FFmpeg, or the manual way in Section 2.
   Make sure ffprobe.exe is there too, not just ffmpeg.exe.

"pip is not recognized"
   Python wasn't added to PATH. Try  python -m pip ...  or  py -m pip ...
   If neither works, reinstall Python and tick "Add python.exe to PATH".

Downloads that worked yesterday suddenly fail
   Update yt-dlp. Accept the update prompt when the app offers it, or run:
       python -m pip install -U yt-dlp

HTTP Error 403 or 429 / "Too many requests"
   The site thinks you're sending too many requests and is throttling you.
   Wait a while (15 to 60 minutes is typical), lower "Concurrent fragments"
   in Settings, and set a browser under the cookies options. Already
   downloaded tracks are skipped when you rerun the same SoundCloud profile
   link, so you won't lose progress.

Instagram or TikTok won't download
   Make sure gallery-dl is installed (Tool Launcher tab will tell you). Many
   Instagram posts need you to be logged in, so set a browser in the Instagram
   cookies dropdown and make sure you're logged in on that browser.

Tag Editor says mutagen isn't installed
   Run  python -m pip install mutagen  and restart the app.

"CERTIFICATE_VERIFY_FAILED" / "unable to get local issuer certificate"
   When the app tries to download the tools, Windows (or your network)
   isn't trusting the connection to GitHub. Usually it's one of these:
     - Antivirus "HTTPS scanning" / "web shield" (Kaspersky, Avast, ESET,
       Bitdefender and similar). Pause that feature and restart the app.
     - A work or school network or proxy that inspects traffic.
     - Your PC's date and time are wrong. Fix them and try again.
     - Python-only: run  python -m pip install -U certifi  and restart.
   If you can't fix it, skip the auto-install and use the manual way in
   Section 2 (winget, pip or just download the .exe files into the "tools"
   folder yourself).

Antivirus flagged a downloaded .exe
   yt-dlp.exe, gallery-dl.exe and ffmpeg.exe come straight from their official
   GitHub releases, but unsigned command-line tools sometimes trip antivirus
   heuristics. If you're not comfortable, install them with winget or pip
   instead.

A black command window pops up
   It shouldn't in this version. If you ever see one, you're probably running
   an older copy of the script.

Nothing seems to be happening
   Look at the log at the bottom of the Downloader tab and at the little
   status line below the tabs. Big playlists take a while to list before the
   first download starts.


A QUICK, BORING-BUT-IMPORTANT NOTE
----------------------------------
Only download things you own, things that are in the public domain, or things
you've got permission to save. Copyright rules and each website's terms of
service are your responsibility, not the program's.

Enjoy!